So,
after my leave, my terminal leave, I came out to
Seattle for a while. I went on inactive duty and
then back to Washington, D.C., and I thought we'd
try it the first few months with Washington. I
wanted to see how I would like it. I'd been there
many times, but didn't particularly care for the
East Coast. The trout and salmon fishing was not
very
good in Washington, D.C. and Barnes, so I was
concerned about getting back to the West Coast.
And so the next year, in September of 47, I resigned
my position with the Civil Service and came to the
University of Washington as associate professor
in oceanography.
Dr. Thompson had just gotten back from his tour of
duty the preceding year at the Chemical Warfare
Service because he was also involved.
And we began to try to put the oceanographic group
back together again after the war. and the problem
of getting a ship and getting things organized and
set up. And it meant that for the first year, 47 and
48 and 49, I was at Friday Harbor in the summer
times, generally teaching a class up there and
down here. in the rest of the year, teaching and
looking for a ship and getting things organized
for our
post-war expansion. The following year, in 1951,
Dr. Thompson felt that he had put in a long and hard
enough duty as...
Pardon
me. So, in 1951, we got together and got Dick
Fleming to come out to head up the new department of
oceanography. So he took over from then a fairly
rapidly expanding system. Did you already have a
ship by 51? At first we hired
small ships. We always had small a ship to work out
in Friday Harbor, either a modified fishing boat.
And then we got the school of fisheries here that
built up a small boat. And so we worked out an
agreement with them so that we could use their
small boat. to cruise and work in the Puget Sound
waters. And then we got the Brown Bear, a former
Fish and Wildlife Service vessel, to
carry on for our work that we could get out into the
North Pacific. And the catalyst had gone over to
private hands and first had gone over into
government service and then private hands and it
was too small for our purposes. So we got the Brown
Bear. Did you already have some ideas in mind when
you started to outfit this ship? Did you know about
what you thought you wanted on it? Yes, we knew
pretty well what we what we wanted. I was a little
bit in double duty at those times, because in 1950,
51, and 52, I was working with the icebreakers
north of Alaska, from north of Bering Strait to
Banks Island. and up farther north. In fact,
there's my North Pole certificate up there in
1948.
So this meant that I'd have to leave Friday Harbor
before the end of the school to take advantage of
the good ice conditions. in August and September,
which is the best time of the year to work up in that
area. When you worked with an icebreaker then,
exactly what did you do? Well, we were still
working to get an idea of the currents for one
thing, the water properties for another, and the
movements of the ice. And this is, of course,
preceding the days when submarines went under the
ice. How long could you usually anticipate being
out at a time? How many days? Well, I
would generally leave on three years. all
sometime in August, early August, and get back
about the latter part of September. And I worked on
those cruises a great deal with Waldo Lyons. who
was looking out after the particular interests of
the navigation operations in that area. And I was
more or less looking at some of the needed
scientific information that we sort of needed to
give a better hand on Arctic operations.
So that worked out for about three years and then I
would send up some of my people each year after I
stopped going up personally, although I would get
an occasional brief. trip in.
And I think I probably have more North Pole covers
than most people.
For philatelists, which I am not, but these are
quite a prized set of covers that were stamped with
the North Pole.
And so this... And during this time, while we
built, starting in about 1950, we built a model of
Puget Sound. And we got Professor Ratray from
Caltech up here to do some of our theoretical work
in hydrodynamics. And so on, and he's our present
chairman
here. So this was the story up until about the
mid-50s.
And I continued going up to Friday Harbor, I guess,
the last year was 1957. But it became quite a rat
race to run back and forth when we were trying to
operate a ship out of Seattle and teach a class at
Friday Harbor in the summertime.
So we
continued to expand and grow along through the
60s. And we got a larger ship, the Thomas T.
Thompson, disposed of the Brown Bear that had done
us much good in the local open sea, and which we
actually got up beyond the Arctic Circle with it.
How large was it? It couldn't have been— 125 feet.
Or
is it 114? I forget. Too small to be up at the Arctic
Circle. Well, it's nice in the summertime, but
certainly no icebreaker.
That, that, that continued in the 19, about the
time we got the Thompson, when Dr. Fleming went
over to Turkey for a year and I sort of chaperoned
the department for a year in his absence. And then
in 1948,
or 1968,
Dr. Rattray relieved Dr. Fleming as chairman of
the department, and still is. And I retired as
professor emeritus in 1973. And
I'm still working. I have several questions I'd
like to ask now. In your first and early work up in
the Arctic,
was it always simply charting what you thought
would be the current flow and ice flow of the
Arctic?
You mean in the Arctic beyond the Arctic Circle?
Yeah, right. Well, and the chemical
measurements. We always took our routine
chemical measurements, the more or less
customary suite of properties in those days. We
would get dissolved oxygen. the phosphates, the
silicates, and the nitrites. This was the
carryover from my days in 1933 and 1934 up there,
although in 1934 I just did get beyond the Arctic
Circle. But the common properties, which are
oftentimes very good indicators, aside from
the... the other direct physical measurements
you made. We always make the salinity temperature
measurements from which we get the density and the
dynamic topography, just like we did on the Grand
Banks, which I'd done a little bit when I was
working on my doctorate in 1933
and 1934. We were interested in
movements, not only of the ice pack up there, but we
were interested in the movements of some of the
chunks that broke off the glacier north of
Ellesmere Island and was drifting around the
Arctic, the T. ones, T2s, T3s, the ones that Joe
Fletcher, Colonel Fletcher, had sort of
pioneered on. And we were interested in the flows
there. We were interested in the, very much
interested, of course, in the bathymetry.
And we actually found the Chukchi rice. out
northwest of Barrow and charted it. And it almost
broke my heart when the schedule was such that we
couldn't work it out in full detail during the year
when we had the ice the farthest north and probably
one of the best years ever to work it out.
Why did you decide to come back to the University of
Washington? It was home? Well, it was home. It gave
me a chance to get out and see. And then I also, as I
say, like to get out with the fly for steelhead and
salmon and trout.
it's just a nice place to live. And then my wife was a
native of Seattle, and so there were two minds bent
towards the same end of getting back here.
The two other places I liked really best was either
Newfoundland or British Columbia.
Well, it's pretty hard to operate Scripps or Woods
Hole, either one of those.
It almost seems as if, from hearing your story,
that you almost drift into oceanography. Well,
you can see the situation.
Oceanography is made up of contributing
disciplines. And it was my early feeling that if
you had chemistry and physics,
you could handle a lot of what went on, whether you
were dealing with the environment, whether
you're dealing with an engineering problem of a
shore. I was a research engineer at Battelle
Memorial Institute, worked on combustion. and
gasification and corrosion and so on. And then in
partnership with some other students, I had my own
chemical lab running on spray residues. And so I
think I was fortunate in some ways. There was never
a time in my life that I didn't have two or three jobs
that I could have stepped into ahead of me. I think
another
phase of it might have been to have gone more into
the organic chemical side. Then you might have
ended up as an MD or something like that in some
other area. But if you had a strong base, you then
whatever came up and it suited your fancy why you
could sort of turn to it and I did like the sea life
going out to sea and the old trips didn't have the
modern communications that we do now where you can
send a crew out to join the ship in the Indian Ocean
and bring them back in a few weeks. But there, as I
mentioned, my trip in 1933 was five months.
And during the time when I was officially signed at
Woods Hole,
during that period, I don't think that I was at
Woods Hole more than
five, maybe six months in the years from 1940 to
1946.
But the work is very much the same in oceanography,
whether you're working in the Atlantic or the
Pacific or the Arctic. For the tropics, you have
similar problems. The same principles apply, but
to a different degree. That's right. I think you'd
be a little colder than one might like it. Yes. I
noticed the last few years I was in the Arctic why it
didn't seem quite as warm as it had in my youth. How
many people usually staffed this ship in terms of
oceanographers in the early ships you went on? Did
you have to take... Two oceanographers? Three
oceanographers? Well, in a five-month cruise, I
was the only oceanographer. And I had to set up my
own stuff on the ship. And generally, I was
assigned ship personnel that I could teach to run
some of the routine analysis. You'd get a
pharmacist made or something like that. But I
would put on and take off all the water bottles,
read all the thermometers. Hmm. And this became a
little bit hairy when the stations were coming up
at three or four hours of bark. And
I could always catch a few winks between stations
in the middle of the night. But in those days, with
some of our materials
The way we ran some of our chemical
determinations, the color metric using the old
fashioned Nessler tools before the modern
optical devices,
you found that you had During the night you would
accumulate enough samples that had to be run
promptly as soon as it was light enough to see.
So the full daylight hours, even in the northern
latitudes, were pretty well saturated with
either taking stations or running samples. And
would you just train a member of the crew to help
you? Is that the way you approached it? That's the
way I approached it. And that was both on the Navy
and with the Coast Guard. And when did you analyze
all your data? Did you do that when you got back? Had
to do that when we got back. But the point in the
field was to ensure that we got the information
that we wanted, the quick checks to know that that
the bottles had worked, that we didn't have any
leaks or mishaps on it. And so this was part of the
problem. And this was true, I think, with many of
the early oceanographers.
You really had to be a one-man scientist.
One of your contemporaries has complained that
what's wrong, he says, with modern oceanography
is you don't get your feet wet any longer, meaning
not enough oceanographers go to sea. Do you think
it's essential to go to sea to be an oceanographer?
Well, let's put it this way. There's no one that can
really appreciate the problems of the oceans to
their full extent unless he goes out and sees the
environment firsthand. That is, he knows then
some of the limitations here. And it's true that
many of the theory and so on can be done ashore. But
given the same capabilities, a person that has
experience firsthand what goes on in nature, I
think, is better equipped to handle some of the
problems than someone that looks at one
particular aspect,
say, on the theoretical side, for example,
without having this experience. He knows what
then can be done to make the field measurements
better, what the limitations are, and it makes for
a better-rounded scientist.
What would you consider the most amazing
innovation, if you had to name just one, which has
taken place in oceanography over the last 40
years? Technically, I mean.
Well, it's hard to separate that
which takes place in oceanography from that which
takes place in science as a whole, because we must
borrow from the different contributing
disciplines of science. A lot of the things that we
have borrowed have not been essentially those of
themselves have put us far ahead in new channels in
oceanography, but they've enabled us to carry out
much more precise measurements on a continuing
base that we were otherwise not able to do. We've
seen tremendous developments in means for
measuring ocean currents. tremendous
developments in looking at the sea from the air and
being able to get an overall view that was not
possible in the early days. We have many new
chemical techniques that are higher precision,
so always extending
to the lower limits of detection and accuracy and
measurements for a number of different compounds
and
different elements
that we could not do in the early days. And
with this ability, then you can make a much more
illuminating analysis.
If you look at what is different now in
oceanography than it was in the early days, and if
you go through and read the oceans that Svardrop
masterminded, you will see that there's very few
things in that framework that have changed in the
gross picture. There's been a lot that has been
picked up in the detail. And we're always going
more on that way. And we have to do so.
So there's a combination of things.
of detecting from a distance, and making
measurements from a distance, whether they be
from air, or through underwater sound, or what
have you. These have all advanced greatly. I might
tell you a little story, if I might. Yes, well,
meet. It happened when we were under radio silence
that one of my the ships in which we were conducting
some iceberg detection made for measurements by
radar on the Grand Banks was situated where we had
four bergs and in the typical dense fog at the Grand
Banks, one of the coastal steamers there that had
never heard of radar.
It was steaming out of St. John's and going on a
certain course. And it observed the skipper of the
ship I had doing the studies. saw that it was
running right into, dead ahead into an iceberg and
he didn't want the ship to have a collision and so he
opened up on an emergency signal and said unknown
ship going on such and such a course at such and such
a speed, you are headed directly for a large
iceberg. Suggest you change course."
And no response, of course.
He got a pretty- pretty close to this berg. We
opened up again and told him that the berg was now
such and such a distance, and he was right on course
for it to suggest you change course to such and
such. Well, he still didn't believe it until he saw
it. And he turned around and set another course.
And being in the middle of a square of about four
bergs, why he chose another course that took him
towards another iceberg. And so we let him go along
for a while. And then finally, we opened up and told
him he was heading for a second iceberg and
suggested that he change course. And he was still
bullheaded, would not change course. And believe
it or not, he tried a third.
And we finally told him when he got close to it, he
says, that if you will please change course to such
and such a direction and continue for a certain
distance, why you will be clear of all birds and can
proceed. And he did. But I've often wondered what
that fellow... Thought you had eyes?